README.md, before:

# Rover Embassy Control System

A modular, async rover control system built with Tokio, implementing a complete control architecture with 16+ modules communicating via channels.

## Architecture

The system is organized into four main layers:

### 1. Input Layer (4 modules)
- **Sensor Array**: Simulates sensor readings (distance, IMU, GPS, battery)
- **Direct User Input**: Captures manual control commands
- **User Instructions**: Handles high-level mission commands
- **Hardware Interface**: Manages hardware status and motor commands

### 2. Core Processing (9 modules)
- **Input Manager**: Central hub aggregating all input sources
- **Logger**: System-wide logging with multiple log levels
- **Model/Calibration Storage**: Stores robot configuration and calibration data
- **Environment Understanding**: Builds world model from sensor data
- **State Manager**: Tracks robot's internal state
- **Stance**: Manages robot posture and balance
- **Task/Mission Manager**: Handles mission queue and task execution
- **Goal Planning**: Plans high-level paths to achieve goals
- **Obstacle Avoidance**: Real-time collision avoidance

### 3. Behavior & Safety (2 modules)
- **Behaviour**: Translates high-level plans into executable actions
- **Safety Controller**: Final safety validation before hardware commands

### 4. Output Layer (3 modules)
- **Output Manager**: Routes commands to appropriate outputs
- **User Feedback**: Displays status information
- **Communication Module**: Handles bidirectional communication

## Data Flow

```
Sensors/User Input → Input Manager → Processing Modules → Behavior → Safety → Hardware
                                                        ↓
                                                     Logger
```

## Building and Running

```bash
# Build
cargo build --release

# Run
cargo run --release

# Press 'q' to shutdown gracefully
# Important: Always use 'q' to quit for proper MCAP file finalization and indexing
```

**CRITICAL**: To create properly indexed MCAP files, you **MUST press 'q' to quit**. Do not use Ctrl+C or kill the process.

When you press 'q':
- The shutdown signal is sent to all modules
- The logger calls `writer.finish()` which writes:
  - Summary section with channel and schema info
  - Chunk indices for fast message lookup
  - Statistics record
  - Footer with summary offsets
- The file will be properly indexed (3-5KB for typical runs)

If you kill the process forcefully:
- The file will be ~92 bytes (just header and footer)
- Foxglove will show "This file is unindexed" warning
- The summary section will be missing
- Message data may be incomplete

**Testing**: Run `cargo run --example test_mcap` to generate a test file that is guaranteed to be indexed.

## Project Structure

```
src/
├── main.rs                      # Entry point
├── lib.rs                       # System initialization and wiring
├── types.rs                     # Shared data structures
├── logger.rs                    # Logging module
│
├── sensor_array.rs              # Input: Sensor data
├── direct_user_input.rs         # Input: Manual control
├── user_instructions.rs         # Input: Mission commands
├── hardware_interface.rs        # Input/Output: Hardware status
│
├── input_manager.rs             # Core: Input aggregation
├── model_calibration_storage.rs # Core: Configuration storage
├── environment_understanding.rs # Core: World modeling
├── state_manager.rs             # Core: State tracking
├── stance.rs                    # Core: Posture control
├── task_mission_manager.rs      # Core: Mission management
├── goal_planning.rs             # Core: Path planning
├── obstacle_avoidance.rs        # Core: Collision avoidance
│
├── behaviour.rs                 # Behavior: Action execution
├── safety_controller.rs         # Safety: Final validation
│
├── output_manager.rs            # Output: Command routing
├── user_feedback.rs             # Output: Status display
└── communication_module.rs      # Output: Communication

docs/
└── diagram.mermaid             # Original system diagram
```

## Features

- **Async/Await**: Built on Tokio for efficient concurrent processing
- **Channel-based Communication**: mpsc and broadcast channels for inter-module messaging
- **Graceful Shutdown**: All modules respond to shutdown signals
- **Modular Design**: Each component in its own file
- **Type Safety**: Strongly typed message passing
- **MCAP Logging**: Structured logging to MCAP files for visualization in Foxglove

## Dependencies

- `tokio` - Async runtime
- `crossterm` - Terminal input handling
- `serde` - Serialization for data structures
- `mcap` - MCAP file format for logging
- `serde_json` - JSON serialization for log messages

## Logging with MCAP and Foxglove

The system logs all events to an MCAP file (`.mcap`), which can be opened and visualized with [Foxglove](https://foxglove.dev/).

### Log Files

When you run the rover system, it creates a timestamped MCAP file in the project root:
```
rover_logs_1737418560.mcap
```

The file contains module-specific topics with the structure `roverOS/<module>` (e.g., `roverOS/InputManager`, `roverOS/SensorArray`) using the Foxglove Log schema with FlatBuffer encoding:
- Timestamp (seconds and nanoseconds since epoch)
- Log level (DEBUG, INFO, WARNING, ERROR)
- Module name (in the `name` field)
- Log message
- Optional file and line number fields

### Viewing Logs in Foxglove

1. **Download Foxglove**: Get [Foxglove Studio](https://foxglove.dev/download) (free and open source)

2. **Open your log file**:
   - Launch Foxglove Studio
   - Click "Open local file"
   - Select your `rover_logs_*.mcap` file

3. **View the logs**:
   - Add a "Log" panel to view structured log messages
   - Add a "Raw Messages" panel to see the JSON data
   - Use the timeline to scrub through logs
   - Filter by log level or module name

### Benefits of MCAP Logging

- **Structured data**: Logs are structured using FlatBuffers, making them searchable and filterable
- **Time synchronization**: All logs are timestamped for correlation
- **Efficient storage**: MCAP files are compressed and efficient
- **Native Foxglove support**: Uses the official Foxglove Log schema for optimal compatibility
- **Rich visualization**: Foxglove provides powerful tools for log analysis with built-in Log panel support
- **Post-processing**: Easy to extract and analyze log data programmatically

### Schema Compilation (For Developers)

The logger uses pre-compiled FlatBuffer schemas located in `schemas/`. If you need to recompile them:

```bash
# Install flatbuffers compiler if not already installed
# brew install flatbuffers (on macOS)

# Compile to binary schema format
flatc --binary --schema -o schemas/ schemas/Log.fbs

# Compile to Rust code (already done, stored in src/foxglove/)
flatc --rust -o src/foxglove schemas/Log.fbs schemas/Time.fbs
```

## Implementation Status

This is a basic working implementation with:
- ✅ All 20 modules implemented
- ✅ Simulated sensor data generation
- ✅ Command flow from user input to hardware
- ✅ Bidirectional communication between modules
- ✅ Safety checks and validation
- ✅ System-wide logging

Future enhancements could include:
- Real hardware integration
- More sophisticated path planning algorithms
- Machine learning for environment understanding
- Network-based remote control
- Configuration file support

Commit message:

Integrate foxglove-flatbuffers crate for logging
- Added `foxglove-flatbuffers` as a dependency in `Cargo.toml` and updated `Cargo.lock`.
- Refactored logger implementation to utilize `foxglove-flatbuffers` for FlatBuffer message handling, replacing previous schema files.
- Updated README to reflect changes in schema compilation and usage.
- Removed obsolete FlatBuffer schema files from the repository.
- Cleaned up imports and improved code formatting in `logger.rs` and related files.

README.md, after:

# Rover Embassy Control System

A modular, async rover control system built with Tokio, implementing a complete control architecture with 16+ modules communicating via channels.

## Architecture

The system is organized into four main layers:

### 1. Input Layer (4 modules)
- **Sensor Array**: Simulates sensor readings (distance, IMU, GPS, battery)
- **Direct User Input**: Captures manual control commands
- **User Instructions**: Handles high-level mission commands
- **Hardware Interface**: Manages hardware status and motor commands

### 2. Core Processing (9 modules)
- **Input Manager**: Central hub aggregating all input sources
- **Logger**: System-wide logging with multiple log levels
- **Model/Calibration Storage**: Stores robot configuration and calibration data
- **Environment Understanding**: Builds world model from sensor data
- **State Manager**: Tracks robot's internal state
- **Stance**: Manages robot posture and balance
- **Task/Mission Manager**: Handles mission queue and task execution
- **Goal Planning**: Plans high-level paths to achieve goals
- **Obstacle Avoidance**: Real-time collision avoidance

### 3. Behavior & Safety (2 modules)
- **Behaviour**: Translates high-level plans into executable actions
- **Safety Controller**: Final safety validation before hardware commands

### 4. Output Layer (3 modules)
- **Output Manager**: Routes commands to appropriate outputs
- **User Feedback**: Displays status information
- **Communication Module**: Handles bidirectional communication

## Data Flow

```
Sensors/User Input → Input Manager → Processing Modules → Behavior → Safety → Hardware
                                                        ↓
                                                     Logger
```

## Building and Running

```bash
# Build
cargo build --release

# Run
cargo run --release

# Press 'q' to shutdown gracefully
# Important: Always use 'q' to quit for proper MCAP file finalization and indexing
```

**CRITICAL**: To create properly indexed MCAP files, you **MUST press 'q' to quit**. Do not use Ctrl+C or kill the process.

When you press 'q':
- The shutdown signal is sent to all modules
- The logger calls `writer.finish()` which writes:
  - Summary section with channel and schema info
  - Chunk indices for fast message lookup
  - Statistics record
  - Footer with summary offsets
- The file will be properly indexed (3-5KB for typical runs)

If you kill the process forcefully:
- The file will be ~92 bytes (just header and footer)
- Foxglove will show "This file is unindexed" warning
- The summary section will be missing
- Message data may be incomplete

**Testing**: Run `cargo run --example test_mcap` to generate a test file that is guaranteed to be indexed.

## Project Structure

```
src/
├── main.rs                      # Entry point
├── lib.rs                       # System initialization and wiring
├── types.rs                     # Shared data structures
├── logger.rs                    # Logging module
│
├── sensor_array.rs              # Input: Sensor data
├── direct_user_input.rs         # Input: Manual control
├── user_instructions.rs         # Input: Mission commands
├── hardware_interface.rs        # Input/Output: Hardware status
│
├── input_manager.rs             # Core: Input aggregation
├── model_calibration_storage.rs # Core: Configuration storage
├── environment_understanding.rs # Core: World modeling
├── state_manager.rs             # Core: State tracking
├── stance.rs                    # Core: Posture control
├── task_mission_manager.rs      # Core: Mission management
├── goal_planning.rs             # Core: Path planning
├── obstacle_avoidance.rs        # Core: Collision avoidance
│
├── behaviour.rs                 # Behavior: Action execution
├── safety_controller.rs         # Safety: Final validation
│
├── output_manager.rs            # Output: Command routing
├── user_feedback.rs             # Output: Status display
└── communication_module.rs      # Output: Communication

docs/
└── diagram.mermaid             # Original system diagram
```

## Features

- **Async/Await**: Built on Tokio for efficient concurrent processing
- **Channel-based Communication**: mpsc and broadcast channels for inter-module messaging
- **Graceful Shutdown**: All modules respond to shutdown signals
- **Modular Design**: Each component in its own file
- **Type Safety**: Strongly typed message passing
- **MCAP Logging**: Structured logging to MCAP files for visualization in Foxglove

## Dependencies

- `tokio` - Async runtime
- `crossterm` - Terminal input handling
- `serde` - Serialization for data structures
- `mcap` - MCAP file format for logging
- `serde_json` - JSON serialization for log messages

## Logging with MCAP and Foxglove

The system logs all events to an MCAP file (`.mcap`), which can be opened and visualized with [Foxglove](https://foxglove.dev/).

### Log Files

When you run the rover system, it creates a timestamped MCAP file in the project root:
```
rover_logs_1737418560.mcap
```

The file contains module-specific topics with the structure `roverOS/<module>` (e.g., `roverOS/InputManager`, `roverOS/SensorArray`) using the Foxglove Log schema with FlatBuffer encoding:
- Timestamp (seconds and nanoseconds since epoch)
- Log level (DEBUG, INFO, WARNING, ERROR)
- Module name (in the `name` field)
- Log message
- Optional file and line number fields

### Viewing Logs in Foxglove

1. **Download Foxglove**: Get [Foxglove Studio](https://foxglove.dev/download) (free and open source)

2. **Open your log file**:
   - Launch Foxglove Studio
   - Click "Open local file"
   - Select your `rover_logs_*.mcap` file

3. **View the logs**:
   - Add a "Log" panel to view structured log messages
   - Add a "Raw Messages" panel to see the JSON data
   - Use the timeline to scrub through logs
   - Filter by log level or module name

### Benefits of MCAP Logging

- **Structured data**: Logs are structured using FlatBuffers, making them searchable and filterable
- **Time synchronization**: All logs are timestamped for correlation
- **Efficient storage**: MCAP files are compressed and efficient
- **Native Foxglove support**: Uses the official Foxglove Log schema for optimal compatibility
- **Rich visualization**: Foxglove provides powerful tools for log analysis with built-in Log panel support
- **Post-processing**: Easy to extract and analyze log data programmatically

### Schema Files

The logger uses the `foxglove-flatbuffers` crate for type-safe FlatBuffer message handling. The Rust code and binary schema files are automatically generated by the crate from the official Foxglove schemas. The schema data for MCAP and WebSocket registration is provided by the `foxglove-flatbuffers::helpers::log_schema_bytes()` function.

## Implementation Status

This is a basic working implementation with:
- ✅ All 20 modules implemented
- ✅ Simulated sensor data generation
- ✅ Command flow from user input to hardware
- ✅ Bidirectional communication between modules
- ✅ Safety checks and validation
- ✅ System-wide logging

Future enhancements could include:
- Real hardware integration
- More sophisticated path planning algorithms
- Machine learning for environment understanding
- Network-based remote control
- Configuration file support
